<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Glossary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Glossary</h2>
			<dl>
				<dt id="aba" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">abá</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Tagalog exclamation of wonder, surprise, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, often used to introduce or emphasize a contradictory statement.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="abaka" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">abaka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Manila hemp,” the fiber of a plant of the banana family.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="achara" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">achara</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Pickles made from the tender shoots of bamboo, green papayas, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="alcalde" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>alcalde</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Governor of a province or district with both executive and judicial authority.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="alferez" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">alferez</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Junior officer of the Civil Guard, ranking next below a lieutenant.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="alibambang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">alibambang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A leguminous plant whose acid leaves are used in cooking.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="alpay" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">alpay</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A variety of nephelium, similar but inferior to the Chinese lichi.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="among" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">among</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Term used by the natives in addressing a priest, especially a friar: from the Spanish <i xml:lang="es">amo</i>, master.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="amores-secos" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">amores-secos</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Barren loves,” a low-growing weed whose small, angular pods adhere to clothing.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="andas" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">andas</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A platform with handles, on which an image is borne in a procession.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="asuang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">asuang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A malignant devil reputed to feed upon human flesh, being especially fond of newborn babes.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="ate" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>ate</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The sweetsop.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="audiencia" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Audiencia</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The administrative council and supreme court of the Spanish regime.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="ayuntamiento" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Ayuntamiento</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A city corporation or council, and by extension the building in which it has its offices; specifically, in Manila, the capitol.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="azotea" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">azotea</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The flat roof of a house or any similar platform; a roof-garden.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="babaye" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">babaye</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Woman (the general Malay term).</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="baguio" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">baguio</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The local name for the typhoon or hurricane.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="bailuhan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">bailúhan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Native dance and feast: from the Spanish <i xml:lang="es">baile</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="balete" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">balete</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Philippine banyan, a tree sacred in Malay folklore.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="banka" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">banka</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A dugout canoe with bamboo supports or outriggers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="bilibid" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Bilibid</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The general penitentiary at Manila.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="buyo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">buyo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The masticatory prepared by wrapping a piece of areca-nut with a little shell-lime in a betel-leaf: the pan of British India.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cabeza-de-barangay" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cabeza de barangay</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Headman and tax collector for a group of about fifty families, for whose “tribute” he was personally responsible.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="calle" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">calle</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Street.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="camisa" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">camisa</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>1. A loose, collarless shirt of transparent material worn by men outside the trousers.</p>
					<p>2. A thin, transparent waist with flowing sleeves, worn by women.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="camote" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">camote</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A variety of sweet potato.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="capitan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>capitan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Captain,” a title used in addressing or referring to the <span xml:lang="es">gobernadorcillo</span> or a former occupant of that office.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="carambas" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">carambas</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Spanish exclamation denoting surprise or displeasure.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="carbineer" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>carbineer</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Internal-revenue guard.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cedula" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cedula</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Certificate of registration and receipt for poll-tax.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="chico" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">chico</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The sapodilla plum.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="civil-guard" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Civil Guard</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Internal quasi-military police force of Spanish officers and native soldiers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cochero" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cochero</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Carriage driver: coachman.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="consul" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Consul</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A wealthy merchant; originally, a member of the <i xml:lang="es">Consulado</i>, the tribunal, or corporation, controlling the galleon trade.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cuadrillero" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cuadrillero</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Municipal guard.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cuarto" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">cuarto</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A copper coin, one hundred and sixty of which were equal in value to a silver peso.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="cuidao" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">cuidao</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Take care!” “Look out!” A common exclamation, from the Spanish <i xml:lang="es">cuidado</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="dalag" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">dalag</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Philippine <i xml:lang="la">Ophiocephalus</i>, the curious walking mudfish that abounds in the paddy-fields during the rainy season.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="dalaga" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">dalaga</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Maiden, woman of marriageable age.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="dinding" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">dinding</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>House-wall or partition of plaited bamboo wattle.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="director-directorcillo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">director, directorcillo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The town secretary and clerk of the <span xml:lang="es">gobernadorcillo</span>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="distinguido" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">distinguido</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A person of rank serving as a private soldier but exempted from menial duties and in promotions preferred to others of equal merit.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="escribano" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">escribano</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Clerk of court and official notary.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="filibuster" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>filibuster</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A native of the Philippines who was accused of advocating their separation from Spain.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="gobernadorcillo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">gobernadorcillo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>“Petty governor,” the principal municipal official.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="gogo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">gogo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A climbing, woody vine whose macerated stems are used as soap; “soap-vine.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="guingon" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">guingón</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Dungaree, a coarse blue cotton cloth.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="hermano-mayor" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">hermano mayor</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The manager of a fiesta.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="husi" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">husi</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A fine cloth made of silk interwoven with cotton, <i xml:lang="tl">abaka</i>, or pineapple-leaf fibers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="ilang-ilang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">ilang-ilang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Malay “flower of flowers,” from which the well-known essence is obtained.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="indian" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Indian</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Spanish designation for the Christianized Malay of the Philippines was <i xml:lang="es">indio</i> (Indian), a term used rather contemptuously, the name Filipino being generally applied in a restricted sense to the children of Spaniards born in the Islands.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kaingin" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kaing̃in</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A woodland clearing made by burning off the trees and underbrush, for planting upland rice or <i xml:lang="es">camotes</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kalan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kalan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The small, portable, open, clay fireplace commonly used in cooking.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kalao" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kalao</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Philippine hornbill. As in all Malay countries, this bird is the object of curious superstitions. Its raucous cry, which may be faintly characterized as hideous, is said to mark the hours and, in the nighttime, to presage death or other disaster.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kalikut" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kalikut</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A short section of bamboo in which the <i xml:lang="tl">buyo</i> is mixed; a primitive betel-box.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kamagon" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kamagon</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A tree of the ebony family, from which fine cabinet-wood is obtained. Its fruit is the <i xml:lang="es">mabolo</i>, or date-plum.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kasama" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kasamá</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Tenants on the land of another, to whom they render payment in produce or by certain specified services.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kogon" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kogon</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A tall, rank grass used for thatch.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kris" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>kris</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Moro dagger or short sword with a serpentine blade.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kundiman" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kundíman</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A native song.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kupang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kupang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A large tree of the Mimosa family.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="kuriput" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">kuriput</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Miser, “skinflint.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="lanson" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">lanson</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The langsa, a delicious cream-colored fruit about the size of a plum. In the Philippines, its special habitat is the country around the Lake of Bay.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="liam-po" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">liam-pó</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Chinese game of chance (?).</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="lomboy" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">lomboy</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="tl">jambolana</i>, a small, blue fruit with a large stone.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="malacanang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">Malacañang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The palace of the Captain-General in Manila: from the vernacular name of the place where it stands, “fishermen’s resort.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="mankukulam" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">mankukúlam</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>An evil spirit causing sickness and other misfortunes, and a person possessed of such a demon.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="morisqueta" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">morisqueta</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Rice boiled without salt until dry, the staple food of the Filipinos.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="moro" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Moro</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Mohammedan Malay of southern Mindanao and Sulu.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="mutya" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">mutya</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Some object with talismanic properties, “rabbit’s foot.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="naku" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">nakú</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A Tagalog exclamation of surprise, wonder, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="nipa" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">nipa</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Swamp-palm, with the imbricated leaves of which the roots and sides of the common Filipino houses are constructed.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="nito" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">nito</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A climbing fern whose glossy, wiry leaves are used for making fine hats, cigar-cases, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="novena" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>novena</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A devotion consisting of prayers recited on nine consecutive days, asking for some special favor; also, a booklet of these prayers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="oy" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">oy</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>An exclamation to attract attention, used toward inferiors and in familiar intercourse: probably a contraction of the Spanish imperative, <i xml:lang="es">oye</i>, “listen!”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="pako" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">pakó</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>An edible fern.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="palasan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">palasan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A thick, stout variety of rattan, used for walking-sticks.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="pandakaki" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">pandakaki</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A low tree or shrub with small, starlike flowers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="panuelo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">pañuelo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A starched neckerchief folded stiffly over the shoulders, fastened in front and falling in a point behind: the most distinctive portion of the customary dress of the Filipino women.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="papaya" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>papaya</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The tropical papaw, fruit of the “melon-tree.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="paracmason" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">paracmason</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Freemason, the bête noire of the Philippine friar.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="peseta" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>peseta</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A silver coin, in value one-fifth of a peso or thirty-two <i xml:lang="es">cuartos</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="peso" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>peso</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A silver coin, either the Spanish peso or the Mexican dollar, about the size of an American dollar and of approximately half its value.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="pina" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">piña</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Fine cloth made from pineapple-leaf fibers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="proper-names" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>proper names</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The author has given a simple and sympathetic touch to his story throughout by using the familiar names commonly employed among the Filipinos in their home-life. Some of these are nicknames or pet names, such as Andong, Andoy, Choy, Neneng (“Baby”), Puté, Tinchang, and Yeyeng. Others are abbreviations or corruptions of the Christian names, often with the particle <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">ng</i> or <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">ay</i> added, which is a common practice: Andeng, Andrea; Doray, Teodora; Iday, Brigida (Bridget); Sinang, Lucinda (Lucy); Sipa, Josefa; Sisa, Narcisa; Teo, Teodoro (Theodore); Tiago, Santiago (James); Tasio, Anastasio; Tika, Escolastica; Tinay, Quintina; Tinong, Saturnino.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="provincial" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>Provincial</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Head of a religious order in the Philippines.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="querida" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">querida</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Paramour, mistress: from the Spanish, “beloved.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="real" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>real</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>One-eighth of a peso, twenty <i xml:lang="es">cuartos</i>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sala" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">sala</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The principal room in the more pretentious Philippine houses.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="salabat" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">salabat</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>An infusion of ginger.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="salakot" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">salakot</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Wide hat of palm or bamboo and rattan, distinctively Filipino.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sampaguita" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">sampaguita</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Arabian jasmine: a small, white, very fragrant flower, extensively cultivated, and worn in chaplets and rosaries by the women and girls⁠—the typical Philippine flower.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="santol" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">santol</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The Philippine sandal-tree.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sawali" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">sawali</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Plaited bamboo wattle.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sinamay" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">sinamay</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A transparent cloth woven from <i xml:lang="tl">abaka</i> fibers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="sinigang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">sinigang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Water with vegetables or some acid fruit, in which fish are boiled; “fish soup.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="susmariosep" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">Susmariosep</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A common exclamation: contraction of the Spanish, <i xml:lang="es">Jesús, María, y José</i>, the Holy Family.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tabi" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tabi</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The cry of carriage drivers to warn pedestrians.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="talibon" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">talibon</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A short sword, the “war bolo.”</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tapa" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tapa</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Jerked meat.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tapis" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>tapis</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A piece of dark cloth or lace, often richly worked or embroidered, worn at the waist somewhat in the fashion of an apron: a distinctive portion of the native women’s attire, especially among the Tagalogs.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tarambulo" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tarambulo</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A low weed whose leaves and fruit pedicles are covered with short, sharp spines.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="teniente-mayor" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="es">teniente-mayor</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Senior lieutenant, the senior member of the town council and substitute for the <span xml:lang="es">gobernadorcillo</span>.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tikas-tikas" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tikas-tikas</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>A variety of canna bearing bright red flowers.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tertiary-brethren" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn>tertiary brethren</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Members of a lay society affiliated with a regular monastic order, especially the Venerable Tertiary Order of the Franciscans.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="timbain" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">timbaín</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>The “water-cure,” and hence, any kind of torture. The primary meaning is “to draw water from a well,” from <i xml:lang="tl">timba</i>, pail.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tikbalang" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tikbálang</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>An evil spirit, capable of assuming various forms, but said to appear usually in the shape of a tall black man with disproportionately long legs: the “bogey man” of Tagalog children.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="tulisan" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">tulisan</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Outlaw, bandit. Under the old regime in the Philippines the <i xml:lang="tl">tulisanes</i> were those who, on account of real or fancied grievances against the authorities, or from fear of punishment for crime, or from an instinctive desire to return to primitive simplicity, foreswore life in the towns “under the bell,” and made their homes in the mountains or other remote places. Gathered in small bands with such arms as they could secure, they sustained themselves by highway robbery and the levying of blackmail from the country folk.</p>
				</dd>
				<dt id="zacate" epub:type="glossterm">
					<dfn xml:lang="tl">zacate</dfn>
				</dt>
				<dd epub:type="glossdef">
					<p>Native grass used for feeding livestock.</p>
				</dd>
			</dl>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
